AMBER HINDS: WordPress
Accessibility Day 2023:
Lightning Talk -
Creating accessible forms the
easy way, with Morgan Kay,
Software Engineer at
Rocketgenius, and Rian Rietveld,
Web Accessibility Expert,
The A11Y Collective.
This presentation was
recorded September 28th, 2023.
RONAK GANATRA: Hello, Welcome to
WordPress Accessibility Day 2023.
My name is Ronak Ganatra,
and I am a senior WordPress Engineer
at Multidots.
This session is a Lightning
round with the three short talks
that have been pre-recorded.
The first talk in this session
is creating accessibility forms
the easy way, by Rian Rietveld,
Web Accessibility Expert,
the A11Y Collective, and Morgan Kay,
Software Engineer at Rocketgenius.
There will be no Q and A
during this lightning round,
but please use the chat to
connect with other attendees.
And maybe Rian is around, so you
can connect with them as well.
MORGAN KAY: Hello.
We're going to talk about
forms and accessibility.
Forms are the most common
interactive elements on websites
and the most basic way for users
to share information with you.
That makes it really important
for your forms to be accessible.
If users can't fill out your form,
they can't interact with you,
they can't place an order,
they can't register for your event,
or fill out your survey.
But making an accessible
form can be intimidating.
There are a lot of things
you need to know to comply
with accessibility standards.
Fortunately, Gravity form makes it
easy to create accessible forms.
By just paying attention
to a few settings,
you can create accessible
forms quickly and easily.
My name is Morgan Kay, and I am
an Engineer at Gravity Forms.
I will be joined by Rian
Rietveld, an accessibility expert
at Level Level and
The A11y Collective.
Together we will show you how
to make an accessible form
with Gravity Forms.
So let's dive in and
start creating a form.
I'm going to start with a blank form
so that I can add my own fields,
and let's call this,
Customer Information.
Let's add some fields here,
let's put in a Name field,
and an Address field,
maybe we want to know what days
of the week people
are available for,
so let's put in this
Multi-Select field.
Let's go to Edit Choices
and add Days of the Week.
So the thing about a Multi-Select
field is, it's this box
where you can select
multiple items from this box.
So that's great if we've
got a situation where people
might have multiple answers
to a question, right?
But the problem is there's
this accessibility warning
about this field.
So let's have Rian show us why
this field is not recommended
if you want your form
to be accessible.
RIAN RIETVELD: Multi-Selects are
difficult to operate with a mouse,
keyboard or screen reader.
People struggle filling them out,
especially when the choices
are not next to each other.
For example, I am available
on Monday and Wednesday.
When I click Monday, and then
Wednesday, Monday is deselected.
I have to press the Control key,
or Command key to select them both.
Now with keyboard only.
I tap into the field,
press down with the Arrow key,
I press the Spacebar
to select the Day.
I hold down the Control key or
Command key, press down again,
release the Control or Command
key, press Spacebar again
and then press Tab to
leave the Multi-Select.
This doesn't work well in Safari.
When I tap in the field,
Arrow down to Monday, press Spacebar,
hold Command key, and go down
again, Monday is forgotten.
The screen reader voice over
is used together with Safari,
and therefore this screen reader
users also cannot use this option.
Multi-Select is too complicated
to operate and doesn't work well
with Safari.
MORGAN: So we can't
use the Multi-Select
but fortunately we have some
other options available to us.
So instead of a Multi-Select, a
good alternative is a Checkbox field
because just like Multi-Select,
users can select multiple choices.
So let's add in our
Days of the Week again,
So now users can
still select multiple.
They can use the keyboard to do
this, and they can see
which choices they have selected.
So this is a much easier
option for our users.
Now I've got this Drop-down field
here and I'm looking at the Settings
for this Drop-down and I
notice that there's a setting
for Enable enhanced user interface.
And enhanced user interface seems
like it would be a good idea
but I'm getting another
accessibility warning.
RIAN: The Drop-down with
an enhanced user interface
doesn't get keyboard focus so
cannot be used by a keyboard
or a screen reader.
In this demo we have
first a normal Drop-down,
and then an enhanced Drop-down.
If I tap through the form,
the enhanced Drop-down is skipped.
The first T-shirt size select,
and then the second one,
the enhanced one is skipped and focus
goes straight to the submit button.
It cannot be opened with a
keyboard, only with a mouse.
MORGAN: So now that
I have my form set up
and I know that all of the
fields in my form are accessible,
there are some field settings
that I need to pay attention to.
So first of all, a lot of
people don't like how it looks
to have a label up at the
top of the field, especially
where we can go in here and
we can put in placeholders.
And that's redundant, right?
We don't need this name
up here anymore, right?
Because it takes up a lot
of space and it looks ugly.
Oh no,
we're getting another warning.
RIAN: A label gives
a form control its name.
So screen readers and voice
recognition software can target
and announce it properly.
A placeholder is used to give a
hint about how to fill out a form.
Always keep the label visible.
While typing, you may forget
what you needed to fill out.
And you have to delete the text
to make sure you are filling out
the right info.
Also a form using how to complete is
easy to check with a visible label.
Be kind to your user.
MORGAN: So even though
we do have placeholders,
the form will be easier
for everyone to fill out
if we do leave the label there.
Another setting that we
need to pay attention to
is the sub-label placement.
So some of these fields like Name
and Address have multiple inputs
on the field, and the field
itself gets a label, but then each
of the individual inputs
has its own sublabel.
And there is a setting
under appearance for
whether the sub-label should
be above or below the inputs.
And there's also,
if we go to the form settings page,
there is actually a
global setting for this.
So we can set the sub-label placement
to be below or above the inputs.
And once we do that, that is
going to impact all of the fields
on this form, or we can
select the sub-label placement
for individual fields if you wanted
some of them to be different.
So, Rian, could you talk about
why we want these to be above
or below, and whether they
should all be the same?
RIAN: People read
from the top down,
and expect the information
they need to be in that order.
A form will be much
easier to fill out
when the labels are above the
inputs as the users expect,
especially with the address.
It's visually much clearer when the
label belongs to which input field.
Compare below and above.
Be kind to your users.
MORGAN: In some fields
like Name and Address,
under the Advanced Settings
tab, there is an option
for enable autocomplete.
And this, by default,
sometimes provides some attributes.
But this looks like a
pretty advanced feature.
Can you explain what's
going on here, Rian?
RIAN: Using autocomplete is
an accessibility requirement
not everyone is happy about.
Autocomplete for credit card
information may be a security issue.
But it is helpful to let the browser
automatically fill out your name,
email, and address data.
Especially for people that have
difficulties with typing or memory.
On the website of the MDN, you
can find a complete set of values
for autocomplete.
And note, there is no value for
City, so use Address level 2 instead.
MORGAN: The Submit button in
our form also has some settings.
For instance, I could set
an image as an input type.
An image seems like a nice idea
because it would look a lot nicer
than that button, but why are we
getting an accessibility warning
about this?
RIAN: Some users zoom in to
be able to read the text better.
There are two ways to zoom
in; everything or text only.
For accessibility, you must
be able to zoom in up to 400%.
Let's do that.
The chances are the image will become
blurry and the text unreadable.
And the user must be able to
zoom in text only up to 200%.
Let's do that.
Only text is enlarged,
images are not.
So the user may still not be
able to read what's on the image.
Don't use an image
for the submit button.
MORGAN: Okay,
so I'll stick with the text input,
but I can also put conditional
logic on the submit button.
Wouldn't it make sense to not show
the submit button, for instance,
if they haven't
selected a T-shirt size?
That way they can't fill
out the form incorrectly?
RIAN: Hiding the submit
button can cause anxiety.
If a form doesn't look or behave
as expected, people may leave
because they can't figure
out how to submit form.
Use error messages for that.
MORGAN: So, now that our fields
and field settings are all set up
to be accessible, let's go
look at the form settings page.
Because there are some settings here
that we need to pay attention to.
We already talked about putting
our sub-labels above the inputs,
and we can do that form-wide
here instead of having to do it
for each field.
There's another setting
here for validation summary.
Rian, can you explain
what this one is about?
RIAN: We want to give
users all the help they need
to fill out a form.
A summary above the form is a great
help for not-that-web-savvy users,
and also for blind users
and keyboard users.
As Summary explains
clearly what still needs
to be done before submitting the
form, and helps keyboard users
to quickly tap to the
fields that need work.
MORGAN: Okay, we've set
up our form to be accessible.
So now it's time to
share it with the world.
So I'm going to click embed,
I'm going to create a new page.
And now my form is embedded
on this page, and if I click
on the form block,
I get some settings here.
If I choose orbital as my form
theme, now I have a bunch
of settings that let me change
the appearance of my form,
including things
like button styles.
So there are a lot of
color settings in here.
So what happens if I start to
play with some of these colors?
What are these warnings about?
RIAN: People must be
able to read your form.
So the color contrast between text
and background must be sufficient.
In this case,
the light blue background
and the white text have
insufficient color contrast.
You need to choose another
combination of color between text
and background here, depending
on what looks best on your site.
MORGAN: So now you
know how to quickly
and easily create accessible
forms with gravity forms.
You can learn more about
gravity forms and accessibility
at gravity4.ns/accessibility.
Thank you.
RONAK: Thank you to Gravity
forms for being the platinum sponsor
or to WordPress Accessibility Day.
As I said,
this is a lightning talk.
So our second session is about
making the Visual tool accessible
to screen readers.
The session will be conducted by
Amber Hinds and [Inaudible 17:09]
AMBER: Thank you to WordPress
Accessibility Day 2023 Sponsors.
Platinum Sponsor, Equalize Digital.
Equalize Digital's
accessibility checker plugin
is an automated
accessibility scanning tool
that helps WordPress websites
become and stay accessible.
Platinum Sponsor, Gravity forms.
Gravity forms is the professional
form builder that you need
to create beautiful,
powerful and accessible forms.
Gold sponsors, 29, Deque,
Empire Caption Solutions, Pressable,
and WP Engine.
Silver sponsors, Code Geek,
Drake Cooper, GoDaddy,
LoneRock Point, NerdPress,
Overnight website by Kinetic Iris,
Rihola Networks, A11Y
Collective, and The Blogsmith.
Bronze sponsors, ExcessaCart,
GreenGeeks Web Hosting,
Hall Analysis SEO Consulting,
HDC, ITX, Ivy Cat, Metabots,
Pixel Chefs,
Simply Schedule Appointments,
SiteGround, Termageddon,
Underrepresented in
Tech, Weglot, and Yoast.